# Feature Enhancement: Case Blocks

* Proposal: [SE-NNNN](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/master/proposals/NNNN-name.md)
* Author(s): [Paul Ossenbruggen](https://github.com/possen)
* Status: **Review**
* Review manager: TBD

Swift-evolution thread: [ternary operator ?: suggestion](https://lists.swift.org/pipermail/swift-evolution/Week-of-Mon-20151207/000810.html)

## Introduction

Switch statements provide a mechanism to execute one of many statements blocks based upon each enum case or pattern matching on a single control value. However, it would be useful for this to support a ternary like ability to return the result of several expressions, not just two as is a limitation of the ternary, to a result value. This proposal will provide a fundamental new partial function block type which will make a building expressions or statements possible in new and interesting ways. Some of this takes inspiration from Scala’s case blocks.  Not only will this support scalars as the control value, but it will also support Dictionaries, Sets, Classes, Structs, and Arrays. 

## Motivation

Originally this proposal started as a simply trying to replace the ternary operator with something more readable, fix some of its downsides, and making switch expressions which provided ternary like abilities to switch. We learned through this process that replacing ternary would be hard due to the historical precedent. So the focus moved to making Switch expressions. After going through this Craig Cruden and Thorsten Seitz had the notion that we could make higher order functions like map available everywhere not just container types. Adding a partial function construct would make it possible for a very general switch mechanism useable not just by map but reduce and filter. 

#### Quick Example

The following is how you typically would write code to assign result from an enum using the *switch* statement, in this case a enum of three or more colors: 

``` swift 

  var result : Int 
  switch color { 
    case .Red: result = 0xFF0000
    case .Green: result = 0x00FF00
    case .Blue: result = 0x0000FF
    default: result = 0xFFFFFF
  }
  ```

Note that the type of result is not inferred, there is duplicated code assigning to result, it is quite a lot of code to write and for something this simple it fills multiple lines. It also may seem that you need to use *var* when *let* will work. 

``` swift 

  let result = color.map { cases .Red: 0xFF0000 .Green: 0x00FF00 .Blue: 0x0000FF default:0xFFFFFF}
  
  ```
  
even in the multiline format it is more concise and there is less clutter to deal with:
 
 ``` swift 

  let result = color.map { 
  		cases   .Red: 0xFF0000,
  			     .Green: 0x00FF00, 
  			     .Blue: 0x0000FF
  		default: 0xFFFFFF
	}
  ```

Some things to note with this example:
* All scalar types will now have a higher order functions. 
* The brace after the word map is a new kind of block which is keyed off of the word cases. This is a partial function. 
* The use of the cases term is used similarly to case but since the results are expressions, separating the list of statements not necessary. Thus it can be much more compact.
* For statement forms of the conditional you would use the *case* keyword. 

## Proposed solution


##### Ranges

For ranges:

``` swift 
  warning = ?(intensity,  0...30: "Nothing to Worry About"
                          31...50: "Maybe something to worry about"
                          51...70: "Better start panicking"
                          71...100: "Run for your lives!"
                          : "Not telling" )
```

In addition to supporting enums and ranges, any enumerable type is supported with these forms. So for an integer you could do something like this where each value maps to a specific outcome, the nth element maps to the integer.

##### Integers

``` swift 
  character = ?(charNum, "A", "B", "C", "D", "E", "F", "G", "H", "I", "J", "K" : "Z")
```

Note that for something like an integer *default:* would be required because that is too many to cover every value of int.

##### Float 

Float could only be supported with ranges.

##### Tuples

Tuples are supported exactly as they are in the statement form. 

#### Container Type and Composability

This could be applied the functional map and other functions.

For example, this would compose nicely with map:

```swift
["bear", "in", "the", "woods"].map(?($0,
	"bear":		"fish" 
	"in":		"out"
	"woods":	"water" 
	_:			$0)
)
                                              
```

```swift
["fish", "out", "the", "water"]
```

> **The part in this sidebar is not officially part of the proposal, I put in because it may be interesting to directly allow applying a ternary on container types, but that is probably something that is best not tackled for this first proposal. This might be useful as a future direction. It may also be the case that the functional commands do everything needed for container types and this would only serve to confuse matters. I welcome further discussion on this half baked idea. I put this in there to show that these ideas could go even further if we decide it is a good direction. **: 

> In this case you are might have a dictionary that does not have the information that you want, this could allow allow you map it. At this point it is hard to say how this would be different than using *map*.  

> ``` swift
> [.North: "North", .South: "South", .East: "East", .West: "West", .Stay: "Stay"] ?(		
	.North: ( 0, -1) 
 	.South: ( 0,  1)
	.East:  (-1,  0)
	.West:  ( 1,  0)
	_: 		( 0,  0)
)
> ``` 

> One area of improvement to figure out. is to be able to switch on the value or key. I am open to suggestions on how to best accomplish that. A tuple seems natural, but not sure how to make it the switch value. 

#### Tuple List (To Do)	

It seems like a list of Tuples could also be interesting but need to figure out what that would look like, and how you would determine which part of the tuple is going to be the control expression. 

#### Result Types

All expressions must match the result type and for type inference to determine the type, expressions must be the same result type. If you want something else it will not automatically find a more generic type, for example this would generate an error: 

``` swift
  let result = ?(value, 
  	1: "String"
  	2: 52 
  	: nil)
```

will not automatically create an Any? for "result". They must specify the more generic type on the left hand side. 

``` swift
    let result : Any? = ?(value,
    		1: "String"
    		2: 52 
    		: nil)
```

### Conclusion 

This proposal has quite a few advantages it addresses not already mentioned above: 
* Now you can search *?(* in a search engine and get results back where the old ternary you would not be able to find anything. 
* Compact syntax only adds 3 characters to the 2 character ternary (5). 
* *fallthrough* and *break* statements can't cause confusion because each result is an expression it can only do one thing and return. If you need that kind of control the statement form is still available. 
* This should have real benefits to functional programmers where imperative approaches are not as desirable. This proposal furthers that capability.  
* Easier to follow than the existing ternary, no floating conditional before you get to the **?** and **:**. 
* Fits very nicely with Swift's existing constructs to solve some problems that are currently cumbersome such as type inference. Almost every example in the Swift Language Book's section on statements could be more simply written with this approach. 

I think this the best balance of familiarity, compactness, power that can be achieved. 

> One further note to think about but not part of this proposal, if we have a demux expression is there value in a mux expression which does the opposite which maps one value to multiple outputs based upon a control?

> something like 

> ``` swift
?(source : control-expr : destination1, destination2, destination3, default:destination)
```

> where destinations are variables. Might be very useful with generators. 

## Detailed design
TODO: needs work!
### Grammar:

The grammar needs to determine the difference between the two forms, switch and array forms, the colon and the cases make that clear it is a switch like expression and the comma separate list keeps the elements separate. 

#### Boolean Form:

``` swift
result = ?(control-expression, expression-if-true : expression-if-false)  
```

#### Switch Form:

``` swift
  result = ?(control-expression, pattern 
  	case*opt* label1: expression1, 
  	     label2: expression2,
  	     ...
  	     labelN: expressionN, 
  	default*opt*: expression)  
```

#### List Form: 

``` swift
  result = ?(index-expression, expression1, ... expressionN, default*opt*:expression )  
```
A demux expression allows certain different expressions to be executed depending on the value of a control expression.

#### Grammar 
A demux expression has the following form:

```
 ?( control-expression, 
    case pattern 1: expression1, 
           pattern 2 where condition: expression,
    case pattern 3 where condition: expression,
           pattern 4 where condition: expression,
    default:
           expression
  )
```

Only newly defined grammars are presented here. See Swift switch statement grammar for the existing grammars: 

```
switch-expression → ?(expression, switch-expression-cases)

switch-expression-cases switch-expression-case switch-expression-cases

switch-expression-case case-label expression | default-label expression
```

demux expression results must be a compatible type of the result. 

### Pattern Matching: 

All the current pattern matching abilities of switch statements should be present for example. "where" clauses. 

## Impact on existing code

The existing ternary will need to be transformed into the new format. The converter tool will need to make that change. I could have continued to allow the original form, in fact, that was my intention when I started this proposal, but for consistency it is important to make a breaking change. I think the benefits of this approach warrant a breaking change. It is not different just to be different but to unify some concepts and provide powerful new capabilities.  

## Alternatives considered

Much of these questions are based upon feedback from the Swift-Evolution mailing list in the thread mentioned above. 

### Why not extend existing statements to be usable as expressions?

In a statement block it is common to not have return values. So you could make it an expression if the return value is used. This makes it more complex from both the programming model and the compiler perspective. This is what other languages do such as Haskell. 

 With *if* statements being used as expressions not all parts need to be handled in a if statement:

``` swift
if cond {

}
```

The *else* part can be left off. If *if* statements made into an expression suddenly just by assigning the result the *else* part will be required, unless you make the result an optional. So adding *x = *: 

``` swift 
x = if cond {

}
```
will then create an error because the *else* part is required. Otherwise you could make it an optional, but then making it an optional just pushes the conditional logic further down elsewhere in the code because it must be unwrapped later. One last possibilty, which probably would never be accepted, is that all statements must have an *else* clause. 

All these points serve to illustrate that statements and expressons should be kept separate concepts as they currently are in Swift. Expressions are always going to return a value and statements don't. 

Another problem is the proliferation of braces, expressions should be light, it looks cumbersome to have braces all through your expressions. It does not look as clean having braces in an expression as braces are usually used to group blocks of statements. Further, it will help reinforce the difference between an expression and a statement to only use braces for statements. For example, all the extra braces in this case are harder to read:

``` swift
let color = switch enumColor {
  case .Red: (switch shade {case .DarkRed: 0xFFEEEE
                            case .LightRed:0xFF0000
                            default: 0xFF1010 } )
  default: 0xFFFFFF
}
```

note that the commas for each case are not necessary with this example but does look significantly more like Lisp :-)

If you look at the language grammar there is a clear separation between what is an expression vs a statement. It would be too large a change to try to unify expressions and statements. See thread for examples. 

Finally, switch statements can have multiple statements after them, that is not the case for expressions, only one sub-expression can be in each part of the case. There is ambiguity as to the return value if this was a statement: 


``` swift
let color = switch enumColor {
  case .Red: (switch shade {case .Dark: func1() 
                                  x = 15 
                                  40 
                            case .Light: func3() 
                                  13
                                  x = 10
                            default: func2()
                            } )
  default: 0xFFFFFF
}
```

This proposal is likely far more straightforward to add to the existing language than making statements into expressions. 

Having statements that act as expressions encourages code that has side effects, which goes against one of the core concepts of functional programming. If I am working on a team, and someone wants to add some new feature and they see a big indented “if” with braces, they will just stick it in there and ignore that it is a functional approach. That new statement they add may add a bunch of side effects and add bugs to the code. If it is an expression that temptation will be less likely. They will see that this code is intended to work as an expression and won’t be able to just stick another statement with a bunch of side effects into it. 





### Isn't this just about doing stuff on one line?

My proposal is about making expressions into first class citizens in terms of control flow. Its main purpose is definitely not about doing things on one line, that is just a side benefit if it works for your particular situation. This proposal supports and encourages multiline formatting and I think actually makes things cleaner and clearer than the statement forms. Quick and easy things things should remain quick and expressable concicely. 

This proposal does often make signifiant reductions in the amout of code written vs a statement. See prior examples.

### I thought we were trying to get rid of ternary!

I went down this path and even wrote two draft proposals one for *if..then..else* one for *switch* expressions, I tried using my proposal and found it was much harder to use, and did not really help with readability as was hoped. Here are some of the reasons: 

* You could not simply put it in a function argument, the way you can with the ternary operator. 
* It muddies the concepts of statements and expressions. The programming model would fundamentally change. 
* It ignored the many benefits of ternary. 
* The *if...then...else*  got lost in in the keywords. 
* Using *if* and *switch* implies formatting that we really don't want in an expression context. 
* Simple one liners are not possible
* It went from 2 to 10 characters, much more typing. 
* Readability was not much better, the operators pop out much better in source.
* It created a problem where it was confusing that for the statement form  if cond { } else { } might require *then* if cond then {} else {}. Do we make *then* optional for statements? It does not fit with the existing swift model where the brace comes immediately after the conditional.  
* Keywords imply indenting which rules out quick single liners.
* I was pretty sure it would be rejected by the community because it was different but not necessarily better than the ternary operator, I believe this proposal is better than the existing ternary, due to the support for multiple types and more flexibility.  

### Why not use *switch* or *if* keyword that returns a value?

Went down this path and touched on it in the previous answer. This looks strange to me:

``` swift
let val = if contr { X } else { Y } 
```

this is essentially a statement which argues it should be formatted like this and which is not compact:

``` swift
let val = if contr {
  X 
} else { 
  Y 
} 
```
Plus if and switch have an equal to their left, pretty non intuitive. Look at all those braces!

### Why not use some other keyword where you can control formatting?

I tried this with *pick*...*from* The idea is that by introducing new keywords the format had no preconceived notions. 

In addition to the community response being non existent, it does not fit the compactness goals:

```swift

let x = pick cond from 4, 8

```

It did feel like it was kinda on the right track to me. So I kept going.

### How about some new operator, lets call it the *Selector Operator* like ->>? 

This also does not have the preconceived notions and we can control how it looks. Boy, I really thought I had it now! 

``` swift
let a = sel ->> .Red: 1, .Green: 2, .Blue: 3 
let b = sel ->> .Red: 1, .Green: 2, .Blue: 3, default: 4
let c = sel ->> case .Red: 1, case .Green: 2, case .Blue: 3, default: 4
let d = sel ->> .Red: 1, (sel ->> .Sun: .Yellow, .Moon: .White, .Stars: .Twinkle), .Green: 2, .Blue: 3, default: 4
let e = sel ->> cases: .Red: 1, case .Green: 2, case .Blue: 3, default: 4
```

But looking at this it kind of lacks structure, it is kind of hard to tell where the ternary is. 

> This specific proposal has another problem.  Since you’re using “,” you’ve introduced grammar problems. For example, you wouldn’t be able to use this operator in a function argument list or array literal, because the , would be parsed as part of the argument list separator.

> <cite>-- Chris Lattner</cite>

> I would characterize this as “different” than ?:, but not better.  Given that it isn’t “better”, I’d argue that following C (and tons of other languages) would make sense here.

> <cite>-- Chris Lattner</cite>

### Keyword, Hybrid and Operator Approach

Hybrid approach, function like name for *if, else, select*, uses : to separate selector, and else to handle differences
``` swift
let x = if(x == y : true else false) 

let x = switch(choose : case A: "A",
			case B: "B",
			case C: "C")
			
let y = select(choose : "A", "B", "C", default:"D")
```

full keyword:

``` swift
let x = if(x == y then true else false) 

let x = switch(choose then case A: "A",
			   case B: "B",
			   case C: "C")
			
let y = select(choose then "A", "B", "C", default:"D")
```
and these are some variants, that I explored which use more keywords.

``` swift

let y = switch(choose from 	case A: "A",
				case B: "B",
				case C: "D")

let z = select(index from "A", "B", "C")
```

This does have some benefits and is worth considering as an alternative if **?(** seems too terse. The advantage of this is that it looks more like a function, which is what an expression really is. The different forms would also allow different syntaxes and would potentially be easier to parse. I think that the **?(** appreach might be applicable to more types which is why I went with that proposal first. 

Advantages:
* Easily read from novices
* Keeps the forms separate for bool, list vs switch forms. Which may be less confusing. 
* Has function like expressions
* Is function like for easy chaining.

These approaches while more easily read:
* Are not nearly as concise as the ternary operator
* The **?(** can not be confused with *if*, *switch* it is its own thing. 
* Get lost in the words but not too bad. 
* One thing that Swift nicely solved is the *if* running up against the parenthesis one thing that really bothers me. This would codify it. Although in this case it would actually make sense, where it did not in the statement form. 
* There would need to be multiple variants for *if*, *switch* and *select*. 

Or if making the difference more obvious we could combine the forms. 

```swift 
if? (x==y : true, false)
switch? (control : .North:”N”, .South:”S”, .East:”E”, .West:”W”, default:” “) 
select? (control : “A”, “B”, “C”, default:”D”) 
```

I expect that that may be more controversial though. As it then steps into the optionals area. 

### Why not put the conditional outside the braces?

``` swift
let result = x == y ?("A", else "B")
``` 
There is some appeal to this and it was suggested by Charles Constant. I did not go with this for the following reasons:

* Chris Lattner said it was different but not better.
* The same problem with ternary where the conditional is floating out before the demux expression makes it so you don't realize you are dealing with a demux until you reach the *?(*. 
* The x == y part looks like you can just stop reading there. But you need to keep going. Putting it inside, you know that it is for the demux operator. 

### Why not use Python's if..then..else syntax?

In Python you put the conditional in the middle and the first true is handled first then the else part is handled last. 
``` swift
x = "A" if x < y then "B" 
```

This has the advantage of the type of the first thing is immediately after the assignemnt and it reads well as an English statement, I think it has the following problems, it is confusing:

* The choices should be at the end
* Similar to the ternary, it is not until after you get to the if that you can tell that it is a conditional. 
* When I first saw this added to Python I found it confusing and not intuitive to any other programming languages. 
* It is quite long.
* It does not support the switch forms easily, but there probably is a way to make it work.
* It adds a non contextual reserved word **then** which others have pointed out is used quite frequently for certain kinds of programming.
* I don't think it fits with Swift's existing syntax patterns that well and it is certainly very different than anything in C.
* It can be confused with the statement form of *if..then..else*

Requiring parenthesis would help with the second point:

``` swift
x = ("A" if x < y then "B")
```

### Isn't this going to be abused like ternary already is?

I don't think ternary is abused. It can easilty be used, like anything, to make something complex. Developers should use the tool that best fits the situation. A well placed ternary can avoid a lot of things that detract from the main point of a function. Quick type conversions don't need to span multiple lines. Being able to express something without the need for large indented blocks is a huge win. With this you also know that all cases possible will get you a result, there is no guarantee in an *if* statement. 

## Community Feedback

There have been many contributors to this discussion that I would like to thank, but not in any particular order: Al Skipp, J. Cheyo Jimmenez, Andrey Tarantsov, Marc Kraup, Jakob Egger, Taras Zarkharko, Thorsten Seitz, Alex Law, Matthew Johnson, Rudolf Adamkovic, Kevin Ballard, Kevin Lundberg, Andrew Brown, Craig Cruden, Dennis Lysenko, Jordan Rose, Brent Royal-Gordon, Vester Gottfried, Chris Lattner, Charles Constant, Austin Zheng, David Owens II, Jakob Bandes-Storch, Conrad Kutsch, David Abrahams. 

Please see the full thread to see their contributions.

In the general conversation about whether ternary can be replaced with a keyword statement Chris Lattner said: 

>* No, I’m not aware of anything that I’d consider to be better than ?:

> In brief, and just MHO, but:

> - I agree that ?: is ugly and magic, and is an additional thing people have to learn if coming to swift without encountering a C family language.
> - I agree that it is unfortunate that it uses “?” in particular, since we’d prefer that to be associated with optionals.

> The closest proposal I’ve seen is the “if cond then value1 else value2” syntax, however that has serious (IMO) problems:
> - It is substantially more verbose than ?:, so much so that it obscures the logic that was trying to be captured.  Simple > things like this become swallowed in syntax:
>  let x = cond ? 4 : 8
>  let x = if cond then 4 else 8

> - Because it looks like an if statement, people will end up writing it like:

> let x = if cond then
>		some_long_expression
>	   else
>		some_other_long_expression

> When this happens, we now have new problems: 
> - At a glance, it “looks” like an if statement, but it is semantically different.
> - it only accepts expressions, not statements.  The way it is flowed makes it look like a statement.
> - It is now force indenting a lot, which just looks weird and isn’t precedented in Swift.

> On this thread, people have been focusing on the negative parts of ?: without considering the positive aspects of it.  Here are some of the positive aspects of it:

> - It is extremely concise, and covers a very common pattern.
> - It is pervasively standardized in a very wide range of languages.
> - It’s weird syntax reduces the odds that people would flow it out and use very large expressions in it.
> - It chains well for multiple conditions because of its associativity.

> To repeat what I said upthread, to build a compelling case that we should replace ?:, its replacement should be *better* than ?:.

> Believe it or not, we only change things when there are strong reasons, and in the absence of any other strong reason, being similar to the C family is a benefit, not a problem.

> <cite>-- Chris Lattner</cite> 

I have done my best to address as many of these issues as possible, with I believe, a lot of success, however every solution has some compromises these are the ones not addressed with this proposal:

* It deviates from C standard a little
* It is still uses the ternary ? but I believe slightly better due to grouping. 
* We use **?** which Chris mentioned as liking to keep it for optionals. However, we use **!** for *not* even though that is also used for optionals. 
* It still uses question mark which, I am not sure can be avoided, but maybe that is ok as Austin Zheng said: 

When discussing the notion that **?** is only for Optionals Austin Zheng expressed this opinion: 

> In terms of semantics: The argument was made earlier that "?" is associated closely with optionals and not suitable for this purpose; I disagree: "?"'s overarching meaning is that of uncertainty or querying, which makes sense both in terms of control flow (predicate determines which way to go), as well as optionals (whose 'empty or not' status is unknown until explicitly checked for, e.g. via if-let).

> <cite> -- Austin Zheng </cite>

In responding, I said: 

> Again when looking at the nil-coalescing operator, implicit unwrapping (!) and optional chaining, I agree. It seems that the ternary operator fits quite nicely with ? meaning this is a question and that notion is encoded repeated thorough the Swift language. ? is almost a key concept in the language and making it keywords takes away from that and it seems even more wise to keep as is because it was a good design from the start. I also see why Chris and others haven’t really wanted to get into this discussion, but wisely let it happen so we could come to the same conclusion. It is almost as if ? and ! are the core concepts of the language for new Swift learners. 

Another exercise was to take a complex nested ternary expression, Paul Ossenbruggen wrote:

> Agreed, I was thinking to I really want turn something that was 2 characters into 10 and will I really be happy with that at the end of the day. A properly formatted ternary can be quite easy to read, it is when people get sloppy and try to cram too much into one expression that they get really hard to follow. For example,

> ``` swift
>     return (a<b) ? (b<c) ? b : (a<c) ? c : a : (a<c) ? a : (b<c) ? c : b;
> ``` 

> If formatted like this becomes easier follow the logic (at least to me):

>``` swift
> return a < b
>	 ? b < c 
>	    ? b 
>           : a < c 
>	          ? c 
>	          : a 
>	  : a < c 
>	     ? a 
>	     : b < c  
>              ? c 
>	       : b
	```

> Is this new syntax helping?
 
>``` swift
>    return if a < b 
>	           then if b < c  
>	                then b 
>                  else if a < c 
>	              then c 
>	              else a 
>	    else if a < c 
>	         then a 
>	         else if b < c  
>                     then c 
>	              else b
>```

> I found this translation quite tricky to do. maybe parens help?
> ``` swift 
>     return (if a < b 
>	            then (if b < c  
>	                 then b 
>                  else (if a < c 
>	                      then c 
>	                      else a))
>	            else (if a < c 
>	                  then a 
>	                  else (if b < c  
>                       then c 
>	                      else b)))
```

> Not really, and I still I found this hugely frustrating, so much so that I am going to drop all support for this proposal and remove my name from it. If anyone wants to take over feel free. 

> Others still keen on the idea should try this experiment. It convinced me is horrible idea :-) I don’t want to be blamed for it by every Swift programmer in the future. 

Responding to the switch expression proposal which this proposal combines Charles Constant said: 

> At the moment, the alternatives are, what, using a dict to map values? trying to shoehorn a corresponding set of values into an enum? using the existing switch statement (pretty verbose in Swift, due to "let" scope etc)? In my own Swift code, I have encountered situations, frequently, where I wished I had an equivalent to a ternary condition that handled more than two values. Chaining multiple ternary conditions together is unreadable. This proposed Switch assignment expression would take care of that. 

> Definitely has my vote!

> <cite>-- Charles Constant</cite>

When discussing the replacement of ternary operator Chris Lattner said: 

> To be clear, I’m not completely opposed to a change here, but it has been discussed extensively before, and didn’t turn up any good ideas either.  That doesn’t mean that a good idea isn’t out there - it might be a very hard problem (of course, it really might be that ?: cannot be beat just because it is established, and anything as good as it but different would be considered “weird and not better”).

> <cite>-- Chris Lattner</cite> 

I think my proposal improves ternary, not hard to understand, and provides a needed abilty. 

In response to the *if..then...else* expression proposal, not this proposal, Austin said this: 

> I am strongly against this proposal.

> In terms of clarity: Paul Cantrill made the very good point in a different thread that "beginner-friendly" syntax may not be the same as syntax optimized for the productivity of developers working on serious projects. I think this is a great example of that principle in action. Sigils stand out to the eye when scanning code in a way that keywords don't, even in an IDE with syntax highlighting (and the perils of relying upon relying upon color have been discussed pretty thoroughly in the mandatory 'self' thread). Replacing them with keywords makes it harder to delineate the arguments.

> In terms of semantics: The argument was made earlier that "?" is associated closely with optionals and not suitable for this purpose; I disagree: "?"'s overarching meaning is that of uncertainty or querying, which makes sense both in terms of control flow (predicate determines which way to go), as well as optionals (whose 'empty or not' status is unknown until explicitly checked for, e.g. via if-let).
> 
> <cite> -- Austin Zheng</cite>

This is another possibilty which I think could work but it is not as general as this proposal, this works mostly with bool:
> What do you think about this?

> let i = if(x == y, 123, 456)

> the second parameter could be optional, so if the condition is false you would get a nil

> let i = if(x == y, 123) // may return nil

> making it function like would make a bit more natural to chain other functions

> let i = if(x == y, 123).map( ... )

> I am usually not an opponent of the ternary conditional operator, but I do know instances where beginner were struggling with it, when they first encountered it. That you cannot google it makes it worse. And in Swift the question mark has a special meaning regarding optionals, that other languages don't have.

> This is just an quick idea though. I agree with Chris, that we should only replace it, when we are really sure the new solution is better.

> -- <cite>Vestor Godfried</cite>

See the **Alternatives Considered** section for discussion of this approach. 

> It is a way to put 'switch' into an expression. I'm not a fan of the two different colons, but that's "just" syntax.

> -- <cite> Jordan Rose</cite>

The double colon is a little strange. I am open to suggestions on better separators. I was trying to keep it as much like the existing ternary as possible but you could do something like *--* or *->*. I wouldn't want that to prevent the proposal from being accepted. I know smaller things are important. The bar could be used instead of the colon.  

> I think this is a good point. We definitely want to keep the boolean ternary operator compact for the simple cases, and that may be at odds with a general switch expression (with multi-case pattern match).

> -- <cite> Jordan Rose</cite>

This caused me to revisit the **:** meaning the else part and changed it to !!. This supports compact ternary like expression for simple caseas and swtich expressions in the more complex cases. 

> In the case where your input is hashable, you could just do:

> let i = [.Red:0xff0000, .Green:0x00ff00, .Blue:0x0000ff][color]

> this would mean that color must be a Color and not an Optional<Color> (because of swift 2.x limitations)

> -DW

This is an interesting possiblility and it is nice in that it utilizes the Dictonary and Array which are a nice intersection of possiblities. However, the big downside is that pattern matching would not be possible and it is a bit more esoteric. 

